[Music]
[Applause]
minky whales
make their way into these placid waters
in summer
this is the most abundant whale in the
southern ocean
minkies are one of the smallest of all
the baleen whales
and like all others they come here to
[Music]
feed
the majestic humpback whales are also
summer visitors
they have traveled thousands of miles
from their winter breeding grounds in
the tropics
to gather the food that becomes
available here in summer
in just four months they accumulate
enough fat
to provide them with energy for the
whole of the rest of the year
all these animals have come here in
search of one thing
the krill krill is the mainstay of the
antarctic
food web
it occurs in phenomenal quantity
billions of individuals in a single
swarm
and swarms can stretch for miles
fur seals also collect this rich super
abundant food
cruel swarms are very patchy but once
found
feeding is easy
[Music]
humpbacks engulf hundreds of thousands
of them
in a single gargantuan mouth
when the going is good the whales feed
continuously
each eating up to two tons of fuel in 24
hours
at some times of the year seasonal
changes make the currents especially
rich in nutrients
and then the ocean around the seamount
becomes a virtual soup
of plankton
at such times hunters gather in
astonishing numbers
bonito smaller relatives of the tuna
they're searching for still smaller
plankton feeders that have been
attracted by the bloom
so are these jacks and their prey
is nearby
a school of anchovetta has strayed up
near the surface even though it's broad
daylight and hunters are on the prowl
these small fish can already feel the
vibrations of the approaching predators
swimming at speed they formed into a
ball and now they must wait for whatever
comes
they've been detected
at first the sheer scale of the bait
ball seems to daunt the predators
but now the bonito arrive and launch the
first attack
still the bait ball holds together
the young yellowfin tuna move in the
speed of this attack is so great
that gradually groups of anchovetta are
splintered from the main fishball
so
[Applause]
one such place is the sea of okut in far
eastern russia
this is the island of thalam
throughout the long arctic winter it's
encircled by ice
but as spring approaches that begins to
break up
and sea birds that have spent the winter
feeding out on the open ocean far to the
south
begin to return
its isolated position and steep cliffs
make talon a perfect nesting site
the tufted puffins arrive first these
are the pacific cousins of our less
spectacular atlantic species
horned puffins soon follow
in all 14 different species return to
talon each spring
and in just a few weeks the once silent
cliffs
come alive to the cause of 4 million
breeding seabirds
this is a multi-story avian city
assembling in these dense colonies after
having spent a largely solitary life at
sea
provides the birds with the social
stimulation that is the key to
coordinating their breeding
by nesting and laying together they
ensure that most of their chicks will
leave the nest at exactly the same time
just like the turtles this is the way
they spread the impact of predators
the world's largest eagle stella's sea
eagle
a third as big again as a golden
throughout the summer the eagles hunt in
thailand's crowded colonies
riding on the updrafts they patrol the
top of the cliffs
looking out for any kitty wake that
ventures too far from the rock face
suddenly the huge eagle stoops with the
aerial agility of a falcon
panic among the kitty wakes confuses
their attacker
[Music]
but the eagle doesn't give up
and it has got one
[Music]
this is the freshly dead carcass of a 30
ton grey whale
it's resting on the sea floor a mile
down
it's only been on the bottom for six
weeks but already it has attracted
hundreds of hagfish
these ancient scavengers are nearly
always the first to discover a fallen
body
that are attracted from miles around
they lack jaws and rasp at the flesh
with two rows of horny teeth on either
side of their sucker-like mouths
next to arrive a sleeper shark
a real deep-sea specialist they grow to
over seven meters long
and have never been filmed at such a
depth before
the gaping wounds in the whales flank
are its work
unlike the hagfish it has powerful jaws
so is able to
rip off huge chunks of meat
sharks hagfish and a whole succession of
different
deep sea scavengers will feast on the
carcass for years
before all its nutriment has gone
[Music]
18 months later when we returned to this
whale
all that was left was a perfect skeleton
stripped bear
it was almost as if a museum specimen
had been carefully laid out on the sea
floor
at first the skeleton seemed totally
abandoned but even after so long there
was still
some flesh left in the head
hagfish have a skeleton of cartilage and
are so flexible that they can tie
themselves into knots
and so get a better purchase on the
flesh they feed on
[Music]
but smaller organisms had fed here
a thick band of white bacteria had
formed on the mud
outlining the original shape of the
whale
and on the skeleton itself colonies of
specialized bacteria
were extracting energy from the bones
themselves
most remarkably and in huge abundance
polychaete worms were collecting the
last edible fragments
these are a new species that so far have
only been found
on the fallen bodies of whales
scientists have discovered 178 different
animals
on a single whale vertebra most of which
have been found nowhere else
hump-head parrotfish nearly a meter and
a half in length
their jaws are so powerful they can bite
through rock
when they descend to feed the reef
itself
is under threat
they are indiscriminate feeders taking
both rock and coral alike
in their quest for algae
these fish play a large part in the
erosion of the reef
the rock and coral they swallow emerges
later
as a fine sand on a single reef they can
produce tons
of it every year
this soft sand forms the tropical
beaches
that we find so alluring
over time the sand builds up to form an
island
which is then colonized by animals and
plants
trees take root birds arrive
the guano from thousands of turns which
have chosen to nest here
enriches the sandy soil which then can
support
more plants
[Music]
[Applause]
you